label3d V2.4j

For a long-term overview of labeling options in Raster3D, read the OVERVIEW.

The r3dtoops/label3d tools included here are a stop-gap measure for
label processing.  They assume that an application program has created
a Raster3D input file containing label instructions (object types 10/11/12).
The label3d script feeds such a file in parallel through normal Raster3D
rendering and through a Raster3D-to-PostScript filter that processes the
labels.  The two components are then re-combined using ImageMagick.
If all goes well, any input file (with labels) that could normally be
rendered by a command such as
	render -tiff picture.tiff < input.r3d 
	display picture.tiff
can be rendered with labels by typing instead
	label3d input.r3d 
	display label3d.tiff

The r3dtops program is still under development. 
Its final form may change more than slightly; in particular I may
rewrite the whole thing in Perl rather than Fortran.
Nevertheless, the present code serves as a testbed to encourage the
generation of Raster3D-compatible labels by other programs.

This directory contains

	r3dtops.f		- program to extract labels from Raster3D
				  input file and describe them in PostScript
				  Fortran source code (may change!)
	label3d			- shell script to process standard Raster3D
				  input file containing labels
	example1.r3d 		- example of input file using labels
	example1.ps		- intermediate PostScript file produced
				  by running label3d on example1.r3d

	r3d_label.c		- code fragment and example driver program
				  illustrating a completely different approach
				  to label generation (read the OVERVIEW).
	example2.r3d		- a simple example Raster3D header file for
				  use with the r3d_label example driver program

The label3d script requires that you have previously installed
	Raster3D (with TIFF support)
	ghostscript (with PPM driver)
	ImageMagick (for image compositing)

Other PostScript interpreters and image compositing tools could probably
be used instead, but I'm happy with the ghostscript/ImageMagick pair.

The sample code in r3d_label.c requires that you have previously installed
the GLUT graphics library on top of OpenGL or MESA.

			Ethan A Merritt   6-May-1999
